Platform tutorial: nf-core/rnaseq full (#131)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-23.4/getting-started/rnaseq.mdx

- [Admin](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx) permissions in an existing organization workspace. See [Set up your workspace](./workspace-setup.mdx) to create an organization and workspace from scratch.
- An existing AWS cloud account with access to the AWS Batch service.
- Existing access credentials with permissions to create and manage resources in your AWS account. See [IAM](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx#iam) for guidance to set up IAM permissions for Platform. 
:::

## Compute environment

Compute and storage requirements for RNA-Seq analysis are dependent on the number of samples and the sequencing depth of your input data. See [RNA-Seq data and requirements](#rna-seq-data-and-requirements) for details on RNA-Seq datasets and the CPU and memory requirements for important steps of RNA-Seq pipelines. 

In this guide, we will create an AWS Batch compute environment with sufficient resources allocated to run the [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline with a large (123.5 GB) dataset. This compute environment will also be used to run a Data Studios RStudio environment for tertiary analysis of the resulting pipeline data. 

:::note

> The compute recommendations below are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compute recommendations below are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files (8 paired-end samples) and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB. 
```

| **Read Trimming**                   | Trim Galore!              | Moderate CPU, moderate memory| Removal of adapter sequences and low-quality bases to prepare reads for alignment.               |
| **Read Alignment**                  | HISAT2, STAR              | High CPU, high memory        | Alignment of trimmed reads to a reference genome, typically the most resource-intensive step.    |
| **Pseudoalignment**              | Salmon, Kallisto              | High CPU, low memory        | A faster, more accurate method of gene expression quantification than alignment using read compatibility.    |
| **Quantification**                  | featureCounts, Salmon     | Moderate CPU, moderate memory| Counting the number of reads mapped to each gene or transcript to measure expression levels.     |
| **Differential Expression Analysis**| DESeq2, edgeR             | Low CPU, moderate memory     | Statistical analysis to identify genes with significant changes in expression between conditions. |

### Pipeline performance

> The compute recommendations in this guide are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compute recommendations in this guide are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files (8 paired-end samples) and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB.
```

> This benchmark compares pipeline run metrics between an AWS Batch compute environment with Fusion file system and fast instance storage enabled (**Fusionv2** group) and an identical AWS Batch compute environment using S3 storage without Fusion (**plainS3** group).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This benchmark compares pipeline run metrics between an AWS Batch compute environment with Fusion file system and fast instance storage enabled (**Fusion** group) and an identical AWS Batch compute environment using S3 storage without Fusion (**AWS S3** group).
```

:::note
The compute recommendations below are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB. 
:::

### Recommended compute environment resources

The following compute resources are recommended for production RNA-Seq pipelines, depending on the size of your input dataset:

| **Setting**                    | **Value**                             |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| **Instance Types**             | `m5,r5`             |
| **vCPUs**                      | 2 - 8                                 |
| **Memory (GiB)**               | 8 - 32                                |
| **Max CPUs**                   | >500                                  |
| **Min CPUs**                   | 0                                     |

#### Fusion file system 

> The [Fusion](../supported_software/fusion/fusion.mdx) file system enables seamless filesystem I/O to cloud object stores for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Fusion](../supported_software/fusion/fusion.mdx) file system enables seamless read and write operations to cloud object stores, leading to
```

simpler pipeline logic and faster, more efficient execution. While Fusion is not required to run nf-core/rnaseq, it is recommended for optimal performance. See [Pipeline performance](#pipeline-performance) at the end of this guide.

> We recommend using Fusion with AWS NVMe instances (fast instance storage) as this delivers the fastest performance when compared to environments using only AWS EBS (Elastic Block Store). Batch Forge selects instances automatically based on your compute environment configuration, but you can optionally specify instance types. To enable fast instance storage (see Create compute environment below), you must select EC2 instances with NVMe SSD storage (`m5d` or `r5d`). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend using Fusion with AWS NVMe instances (fast instance storage) as this delivers the fastest performance when compared to environments using only AWS EBS (Elastic Block Store). Batch Forge selects instances automatically based on your compute environment configuration, but you can optionally specify instance types. To enable fast instance storage (see Create compute environment below), you must select EC2 instances with NVMe SSD storage (`m5d` or `r5d` families). 
```

:::note 
Fusion requires a license for use in Seqera Platform compute environments or directly in Nextflow. Fusion can be trialed at no cost. [Contact Seqera](https://seqera.io/contact-us/) for more details.
:::

### Create compute environment

![Add Platform compute environment](./_images/create-ce.gif)

From the **Compute Environments** tab in your organization workspace, select **Add compute environment** and complete the following fields:

| **Field**                             | **Description**                                            |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Name**                              | A unique name for the compute environment.                 |
| **Platform**                          | AWS Batch                                                  |
| **Credentials**                       | Select existing credentials, or **+** to create new credentials:|
| **Access Key**                        | AWS access key ID                          |

> | **Secret Key**                        |  AWS secret access key                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Secret Key**                        | AWS secret access key                      |
```

| **Enable Fusion v2**                  | Access your S3-hosted data via the Fusion v2 file system.  |
| **Enable Fast Instance Storage**      | Use NVMe instance storage to speed up I/O and disk access. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Config Mode**                       | Batch Forge                                                |
| **Provisioning Model**                | Choose between Spot and On-demand instances.               |
| **Max CPUs**                          | Sensible values for production use range between 2000 and 5000.|
| **Enable Fargate for head job**       | Run the Nextflow head job using the Fargate container service to speed up pipeline launch. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Allowed S3 buckets**                | Additional S3 buckets or paths to be granted read-write permission for this compute environment. Add data paths to be mounted in your data studio here, if different from your pipeline work directory.|
| **Resource labels**                   | `name=value` pairs to tag the AWS resources created by this compute environment.|

## Add pipeline to Platform 

:::info

> The [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline is a highly configurable and robust workflow designed to analyze RNA-Seq data. It performs quality control, alignment, quantification, and differential expression analysis.

Reviewer 2: nf-core/rnaseq doesn't do differential analysis- which is why we needed nf-core/differentialabundance.

```suggestion
The [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline is a highly configurable and robust workflow designed to analyze RNA-Seq data. It performs quality control, alignment and quantification.
```

<details>
  <summary>**Example nf-core/rnaseq dataset**</summary>
    
  | sample              | fastq_1                              | fastq_2                              | strandedness |
  | ------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------ | ------------ |
  | WT_REP1             | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | reverse      |
  | WT_REP1             | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | reverse      |
  | WT_REP2             | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | reverse      |
  | RAP1_UNINDUCED_REP1 | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... |                                      | reverse      |
  | RAP1_UNINDUCED_REP2 | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... |                                      | reverse      |
  | RAP1_UNINDUCED_REP2 | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... |                                      | reverse      |
  | RAP1_IAA_30M_REP1   | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/rnaseq/... | reverse      |

> </details>

Reviewer: I would also actually suggest that since we are talking about the `test_full` dataset here, why not show that samplesheet with the paired fastq instead?
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nf-core/test-datasets/rnaseq/samplesheet/v3.10/samplesheet_full.csv

In Platform, samplesheets and other data can be made easily accessible in one of two ways: 
- Use **Data Explorer** to browse and interact with remote data from AWS S3, Azure Blob Storage, and Google Cloud Storage repositories, directly in your organization workspace.
- Use **Datasets** to upload structured data to your workspace in CSV (Comma-Separated Values) or TSV (Tab-Separated Values) format.

<details>
  <summary>**Add a cloud bucket via Data Explorer**</summary> 

>   Private cloud storage buckets accessible to the credentials in your workspace are added to Data Explorer automatically by default. However, you can also add custom directory paths within buckets to your workspace to simplify direct access.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Private cloud storage buckets accessible with the credentials in your workspace are added to Data Explorer automatically by default. However, you can also add custom directory paths within buckets to your workspace to simplify direct access.
```

 ![Launch a pipeline](./_images/launch-form-1.gif)

The launch form consists of **General config**, **Run parameters**, and **Advanced options** sections to specify your run parameters before execution, and an execution summary. Use section headings or select the **Previous** and **Next** buttons at the bottom of the page to navigate between sections. 

### General config 

![General config tab](./_images/launch-form-2.gif)

- **Pipeline to launch**: The pipeline Git repository name or URL. For saved pipelines, this is prefilled and cannot be edited.
- **Revision number**: A valid repository commit ID, tag, or branch name. For saved pipelines, this is prefilled and cannot be edited.
- **Config profiles**: One or more [configuration profile](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/config.html#config-profiles) names to use for the execution. Config profiles must be defined in the `nextflow.config` file in the pipeline repository.

> - **Workflow run name**: A unique identifier for the run, pre-filled with a random name. This can be customized.

Author: You're right. I was under the impression that we enforced unique run names at the workspace level. I tested now and the same run name twice in a row submitted without error. Thanks.

- **Labels**: Assign new or existing [labels](../labels/overview.mdx) to the run.
- **Compute environment**: Your AWS Batch compute environment. 
- **Work directory**: The cloud storage path where pipeline scratch data is stored. Platform will create a scratch sub-folder if only a cloud bucket location is specified.
  :::note
  The credentials associated with the compute environment must have access to the work directory.
  :::

### Run parameters 

![Run parameters](./_images/launch-form-3.gif)

There are three ways to enter **Run parameters** prior to launch:

- The **Input form view** displays form fields to enter text, select attributes from dropdowns, and browse input and output locations with [Data Explorer](../data/data-explorer.mdx).

> - The **Config view** displays a raw schema that you can edit directly. Select JSON or YAML format from the **View as** dropdown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The **Config view** displays raw configuration text that you can edit directly. Select JSON or YAML format from the **View as** dropdown.
```

(it's not a schema)

- **Upload params file** allows you to upload a JSON or YAML file with run parameters.

Platform uses the `nextflow_schema.json` file in the root of the pipeline repository to dynamically create a form with the necessary pipeline parameters. 

Specify your input and output parameters:

<details>
  <summary>**input**</summary>

  Use **Browse** to select your pipeline input data: 

>   - In the **Data Explorer** tab, select the existing cloud bucket that contains your samplesheet, then browse or search for the samplesheet file to select it as input.

Reviewer 2: It'll be just one of these, right? This reads like it's both.

  - Nextflow session ID
  - Username of the launcher
  - Work directory path

  #### View details for a task

  Scroll down the page to view:

  - The progress of individual pipeline **Processes**
  - **Aggregated stats** for the run (total walltime, CPU hours)
  - **Workflow metrics** (CPU efficiency, memory efficiency)
  - A **Task details** table for every task in the workflow

  The task details table provides further information on every step in the pipeline, including task statuses and metrics.

  #### Task details

  Select a task in the task table to open the **Task details** dialog. The dialog has three tabs: **About**, **Execution log**, and **Data Explorer**.

  The **About** tab includes:

  1. **Name**: Process name and tag
  2. **Command**: Task script, defined in the pipeline process
  3. **Status**: Exit code, task status, and number of attempts
  4. **Work directory**: Directory where the task was executed
  5. **Environment**: Environment variables that were supplied to the task
  6. **Execution time**: Metrics for task submission, start, and completion time
  7. **Resources requested**: Metrics for the resources requested by the task

>   8. **Resources used**: Metrics for the resources used by the task

Author: @adamrtalbot This entire monitoring section is collapsed by default, so it adds detail but is only there if users click to expand it.

  ![Task details window](./quickstart-demo/assets/task-details.gif)

  #### Execution log

  The **Execution log** tab provides a real-time log of the selected task's execution. Task execution and other logs (such as stdout and stderr) are available for download from here, if still available in your compute environment.

  #### Task work directory in Data Explorer

  If a task fails, a good place to begin troubleshooting is the task's work directory.

  Nextflow hash-addresses each task of the pipeline and creates unique directories based on these hashes. Instead of navigating through a bucket on the cloud console or filesystem to find the contents of this directory, use the **Data Explorer** tab in the Task window to view the work directory.

  Data Explorer allows you to view the log files and output files generated for each task in its working directory, directly within Platform. You can view, download, and retrieve the link for these intermediate files in cloud storage from the **Data Explorer** tab to simplify troubleshooting.

  ![Task data explorer](./quickstart-demo/assets/sp-cloud-task-data-explorer.gif)

</details>

## Tertiary analysis with Data Studios

> Set up an environment for tertiary analysis of your pipeline data and enable collaboration with other workspace participants. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set up an environment for tertiary analysis of your pipeline data and enable collaboration with other workspace participants. 
```

This reads like an instruction to do that right now- maybe it should be combined with the section title?

> **Data Studios** streamlines the process of creating interactive analysis environments for Platform users. With built-in templates for platforms like Jupyter Notebook, RStudio, and VSCode, creating a data studio is as simple as adding and sharing pipelines or datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Data Studios** streamlines the process of creating interactive analysis environments for Platform users, with built-in templates for platforms like Jupyter Notebook, RStudio, and VSCode. Creating a data studio in Seqera Platform is as simple as adding and sharing pipelines or datasets.
```

> For the purposes of this guide, we will create an RStudio environment in which to normalize the pipeline output data, perform differential expression analysis, and visualize the data with MDS plots, volcano plots, and a heatmap of the most differentially expressed genes.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the purposes of this guide, we will create an RStudio environment in which to normalize the pipeline output data, perform differential expression analysis, and visualize the data with exploratory plots.  
```
I'm not sure the terms 'MDS' or 'volcano plot' will be obvious to everyone in the target audience.

:::
- Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the S3 bucket or directory path that contains the pipeline work directory of your RNA-Seq run. 
- Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).
- Select **Add**.
- Once the data studio has been created, select the options menu next to it and select **Start**.
- When the data studio is in a running state, **Connect** to it. 

### Perform the analysis and explore results

The RStudio environment can be configured with the packages you wish to install and the R script you wish to run. For the purposes of this guide, run the following scripts in the RStudio console to install the necessary packages and perform the analysis:

1. Install and load the necessary packages and libraries:

    ```console
    # Install required packages
    if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
      install.packages("BiocManager")
    BiocManager::install(c("limma", "edgeR", "ggplot2", "gplots"))

    # Load required libraries
    library(limma)
    library(edgeR)
    library(ggplot2)
    library(gplots)
    ```

1. Read and convert the count data and sample information:

    :::info

>     Replace `<PATH_TO_YOUR_COUNTS_FILE>` and `<PATH_TO_YOUR_SAMPLE_INFO_FILE>` with the paths to your `salmon.merged.gene_counts.tsv` and `sampleinfo.txt` files.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how pedantic we want to be here about correctness in analysis.

There can be important differences in effective gene length across conditions, which we normally account for in analysis. Using salmon.merged.gene_counts.tsv will just ignore that effect.

We can either model those length differences (preferable, but would probably add some unnecessary complexity here), or otherwise just use salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled.tsv (which is probably the simplest thing to do here).

Reviewer 2: The workflow does give you the raw outputs from Salmon / Kallisto, which are at the transcript level, and which is what tximport reads.

But it also uses tximport internally to produce those count matrices (salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled.tsv, salmon.merged.gene_counts.tsv), and provides gene lengths (salmon.merged.gene_lengths.tsv) that can be used as offsets directly in downstream analysis.

Author: I'd err on the side of pedantic. So need to run the script again with salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled.tsv and update the GIFs and steps. Thanks for the detailed feedback gents!

    # Remove the gene_name column if it exists
    if("gene_name" %in% colnames(counts)) {
      counts <- counts[, -which(colnames(counts) == "gene_name")]
    }

    # Convert to matrix
    counts <- as.matrix(counts)

    # Read in the sample information
    targets <- read.table(file="/workspace/data/<PATH_TO_YOUR_SAMPLE_INFO_FILE>", 
                          header=TRUE, stringsAsFactors=FALSE, sep="", check.names=FALSE)

    # Ensure column names are correct
    colnames(targets) <- c("Sample", "Group")
    ```

1. Create a DGEList object and filter out low-count genes:

    ```console
    # Create a DGEList object
    y <- DGEList(counts, group=targets$Group)

    # Calculate CPM (counts per million) values
    mycpm <- cpm(y)

    # Filter low count genes
    thresh <- mycpm > 0.5
    keep <- rowSums(thresh) >= 2
    y <- y[keep, , keep.lib.sizes=FALSE]
    ```

1. Normalize the data:

    ```console
    # Normalize the data
    y <- calcNormFactors(y)
    ```

1. Print a summary of the filtered data:

    ```console 
    # Print summary of filtered data
    print(dim(y))
    print(y$samples)
    ```

> 1. Create an MDS plot, displayed in RStudio plots viewer (`a`) and saved as a PNG file (`b`):

Reviewer 2: Might need to quickly explain what an MDS plot is for.

    ```console 
    # Create MDS plot
    # a. Display in RStudio
    plotMDS(y, col=as.numeric(factor(targets$Group)), labels=targets$Group)
    legend("topright", legend=levels(factor(targets$Group)), 
          col=1:nlevels(factor(targets$Group)), pch=20)

    # b. Save MDS plot to file (change `png` to `pdf` to create a PDF file)
    png("MDS_plot.png", width = 800, height = 600)
    plotMDS(y, col=as.numeric(factor(targets$Group)), labels=targets$Group)
    legend("topright", legend=levels(factor(targets$Group)), 
          col=1:nlevels(factor(targets$Group)), pch=20)

>     dev.off()

Author: @adamrtalbot I need to run the R script again to used salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled.tsv either way, so will reformat while I'm in there. Just to confirm, by reformat you mean more than just swapping out `console` with `r` in the Markdown code blocks, right?

    # Estimate dispersion
    y <- estimateDisp(y, design)

    # Fit the model
    fit <- glmQLFit(y, design)

    # Define contrasts
    my.contrasts <- makeContrasts(
      GM12878vsH1 = GM12878 - H1,
      GM12878vsK562 = GM12878 - K562,
      GM12878vsMCF7 = GM12878 - MCF7,
      H1vsK562 = H1 - K562,
      H1vsMCF7 = H1 - MCF7,
      K562vsMCF7 = K562 - MCF7,
      levels = design
    )

    # Perform differential expression analysis for each contrast
    results <- lapply(colnames(my.contrasts), function(contrast) {
      qlf <- glmQLFTest(fit, contrast=my.contrasts[,contrast])
      topTags(qlf, n=Inf)
    })
    names(results) <- colnames(my.contrasts)
    ```

1. Print the number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison and save the results to CSV files:    

    ```console
    # Print the number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison
    for (name in names(results)) {
      de_genes <- sum(results[[name]]$table$FDR < 0.05)
      print(paste("Number of DE genes in", name, ":", de_genes))
    }

    # Save results
    for (name in names(results)) {
      write.csv(results[[name]], file=paste0("DE_genes_", name, ".csv"))
    }
    ```

> 1. Create volcano plots for each differential expression comparison, displayed in RStudio plots viewer and saved as PNG files:

Reviewer 2: Might need a 1-sentence description of what a volcano plot is

              main = "Top DE Genes Across Samples")

    # Save heatmap to file (change `png` to `pdf` to create a PDF file)
    png("heatmap_top_DE_genes.png", width = 1000, height = 1200)
    heatmap.2(as.matrix(top_gene_expr), scale = "row", col = my_palette,
              trace = "none", dendrogram = "column", margins = c(5, 10),
              labRow = FALSE, 
              ColSideColors = rainbow(length(unique(y$samples$group)))[factor(y$samples$group)],
              main = "Top DE Genes Across Samples")
    dev.off()

    # Print the number of top genes in the heatmap
    print(paste("Number of top DE genes in heatmap:", length(top_genes)))
    ```

![RStudio plots](./_images/rstudio.gif)

### Collaborate in the data studio

To share your results or allow colleagues to perform exploratory analysis, share a link to the data studio by selecting the options menu for the data studio you want to share, then select **Copy data studio URL**. With this link, other authenticated users with the **Connect** [role](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx) (or greater) can access the session directly.

## RNA-Seq data and requirements

> RNA-Seq data typically consists of raw sequencing reads from high-throughput sequencing technologies like Illumina. These reads are used to quantify gene expression levels and discover novel transcripts. A typical RNA-Seq dataset can range from a few GB to several hundred GB, depending on the number of samples and the sequencing depth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RNA-Seq data typically consists of raw sequencing reads from high-throughput sequencing technologies. These reads are used to quantify gene expression levels and discover novel transcripts. A typical RNA-Seq dataset can range from a few GB to several hundred GB, depending on the number of samples and the sequencing depth.
```

> For example, the publicly available 1000 Genomes dataset contains RNA-Seq data for over 2500 samples, with low-coverage individual FASTQ files ranging from 30 to 50 GB in size.

Reviewer 2: Yep, RNA-seq in there would be news to me (though that does happen!)

> For example, the publicly available 1000 Genomes dataset contains RNA-Seq data for over 2500 samples, with low-coverage individual FASTQ files ranging from 30 to 50 GB in size.

Author: Noted. Removing this size example since we make ample mention of the `test_full` dataset's size elsewhere.

| **Pipeline step**                   | **Tools**                 | **Resource needs**           | **Description**                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Quality Control (QC)**            | FastQC, MultiQC           | Moderate CPU, low memory     | Initial quality checks of raw reads to assess sequencing quality and identify potential issues.   |
| **Read Trimming**                   | Trim Galore!              | Moderate CPU, moderate memory| Removal of adapter sequences and low-quality bases to prepare reads for alignment.               |
| **Read Alignment**                  | HISAT2, STAR              | High CPU, high memory        | Alignment of trimmed reads to a reference genome, typically the most resource-intensive step.    |
| **Quantification**                  | featureCounts, Salmon     | Moderate CPU, moderate memory| Counting the number of reads mapped to each gene or transcript to measure expression levels.     |

> | **Differential Expression Analysis**| DESeq2, edgeR             | Low CPU, moderate memory     | Statistical analysis to identify genes with significant changes in expression between conditions. |

Author: I'm worried that becomes too specific to our test_full dataset then, with little generalizable info given. But I guess a range is more useful than "low/moderate/high", fair.

> | **Differential Expression Analysis**| DESeq2, edgeR             | Low CPU, moderate memory     | Statistical analysis to identify genes with significant changes in expression between conditions. |

Author: @adamrtalbot updated. Let me know if the table reads better.

| **Enable fast instance storage**      | Use NVMe instance storage to speed up I/O and disk access. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Config Mode**                       | Batch Forge                                                |
| **Provisioning Model**                | Choose between Spot and On-demand instances.               |
| **Max CPUs**                          | Sensible values for production use range between 2000 and 5000.|
| **Enable Fargate for head job**       | Run the Nextflow head job using the Fargate container service to speed up pipeline launch. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Allowed S3 buckets**                | Additional S3 buckets or paths to be granted read-write permission for this compute environment. Add data paths to be mounted in your data studio here, if different from your pipeline work directory.|
| **Resource labels**                   | `name=value` pairs to tag the AWS resources created by this compute environment.|

## Add pipeline to Platform 

:::info
The [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline is a highly configurable and robust workflow designed to analyze RNA-Seq data. It performs quality control, alignment and quantification.

> ![nf-core/rnaseq subway map](./_images/nf-core-rnaseq_metro_map_grey_static.svg)

Reviewer 3: Looking at this again, the image is fine, I just can't read the small text under Methods. I don't think there is much we can do when it's been shrunk to fit in the box.

    - **Seqera Enterprise**: Specify the **Seqera Platform URL** (hostname) and **Base API URL** for your Enterprise instance, then paste your Platform **Access token** and select **Next**.
    :::tip
    If you do not have a Platform access token, select **Get your access token from Seqera Platform** to open the Access tokens page in a new browser tab.
    :::
1. Select your Platform **Organization**, **Workspace**, and **Compute environment** for the imported pipeline. 
1. (Optional) Customize the **Pipeline Name** and **Pipeline Description**.
1. Select **Add Pipeline**. 

:::info
To add a custom pipeline not listed in Seqera Pipelines to your Platform workspace, see [Add pipelines](./quickstart-demo/add-pipelines.mdx#) for manual Launchpad instructions. 
:::

## Pipeline input data

The [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline works with input datasets (samplesheets) containing sample names, FASTQ file locations (paths to FASTQ files in cloud or local storage), and strandedness. For example, the dataset used in the `test_full` profile is derived from the publicly available iGenomes collection of datasets, commonly used in bioinformatics analyses. 

> This dataset represents RNA-seq samples from various human cell lines (GM12878, K562, MCF7, and H1) with biological replicates, stored in an AWS S3 bucket (`s3://ngi-igenomes`) as part of the iGenomes resource. These RNA-seq datasets consist of paired-end sequencing reads, which can be used to study gene expression patterns in different cell types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This dataset represents RNA-Seq samples from various human cell lines (GM12878, K562, MCF7, and H1) with biological replicates, stored in an AWS S3 bucket (`s3://ngi-igenomes`) as part of the iGenomes resource. These RNA-Seq datasets consist of paired-end sequencing reads, which can be used to study gene expression patterns in different cell types.
```

      - An optional bucket **Description**.
  1. Select **Add**.

  You can now select data directly from this bucket as input when launching your pipeline, without the need to interact with cloud consoles or CLI tools. 

</details>

<details>
  <summary>**Add a dataset**</summary>

  From the **Datasets** tab, select **Add Dataset**.

  ![Add a dataset](./quickstart-demo/assets/sp-cloud-add-a-dataset.gif)

  Specify the following dataset details:

  - A **Name** for the dataset, such as `nf-core-rnaseq-dataset`.
  - A **Description** for the dataset.
  - Select the **First row as header** option to prevent Platform from parsing the header row of the samplesheet as sample data.
  - Select **Upload file** and browse to your CSV or TSV samplesheet file in local storage, or simply drag and drop it into the box.

  The dataset is now listed in your organization workspace datasets and can be selected as input when launching your pipeline. 

  :::info
  Platform does not store the data used for analysis in pipelines. The dataset must specify the locations of data stored on your own infrastructure.
  :::

</details>

## Launch pipeline

:::note

> This guide is based on version 3.15.1 of the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline. Launch form parameters may differ in other versions. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide is based on version 3.15.1 of the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline. Launch form parameters and tools may differ in other versions. 
```
Tool versions will change between version (they may become better and might improve efficiency)

    if ("gene_name" %in% colnames(counts)) {
      counts <- counts[, -which(colnames(counts) == "gene_name")]
    }

    # Convert to matrix
    counts <- as.matrix(counts)

    # Read in the sample information
    targets <- read.table(
      file = "/workspace/data/<PATH_TO_YOUR_SAMPLE_INFO_FILE>",
      header = TRUE,
      stringsAsFactors = FALSE,
      sep = "",
      check.names = FALSE
    )

    # Ensure column names are correct
    colnames(targets) <- c("Sample", "Group")
    ```

1. Create a DGEList object and filter out low-count genes:

    ```r
    # Create a DGEList object
    y <- DGEList(counts, group = targets$Group)

    # Calculate CPM (counts per million) values
    mycpm <- cpm(y)

    # Filter low count genes
    thresh <- mycpm > 0.5
    keep <- rowSums(thresh) >= 2
    y <- y[keep, , keep.lib.sizes = FALSE]
    ```

1. Normalize the data:

    ```r
    # Normalize the data
    y <- calcNormFactors(y)
    ```

1. Print a summary of the filtered data:

    ```r
    # Print summary of filtered data
    print(dim(y))
    print(y$samples)
    ```

1. Create an MDS plot, displayed in RStudio plots viewer (`a`) and saved as a PNG file (`b`):

    :::info

>     MDS plots are used to visualize the overall similarity between RNA-seq samples based on their gene expression profiles, helping to identify sample clusters and potential batch effects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    MDS plots are used to visualize the overall similarity between RNA-Seq samples based on their gene expression profiles, helping to identify sample clusters and potential batch effects.
```

      topTags(qlf, n = Inf)
    })
    names(results) <- colnames(my.contrasts)
    ```

    :::info 
    This script is written for the analysis of human data, based on nf-core/rnaseq's `test_full` dataset. To adapt the script for your data, modify the contrasts based on the comparisons you want to make between your sample groups:

    ```r
    my.contrasts <- makeContrasts(
      Sample1vsSample2 = Sample1 - Sample2,
      Sample2vsSample3 = Sample2 - Sample3,
      ...
      levels = design
    )
    ```
    :::

1. Print the number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison and save the results to CSV files:    

    ```r
    # Print the number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison
    for (name in names(results)) {
      de_genes <- sum(results[[name]]$table$FDR < 0.05)
      print(paste("Number of DE genes in", name, ":", de_genes))
    }

    # Save results
    for (name in names(results)) {
      write.csv(results[[name]], file = paste0("DE_genes_", name, ".csv"))
    }
    ```

1. Create volcano plots for each differential expression comparison, displayed in RStudio plots viewer and saved as PNG files:

    :::info

>     Volcano plots in RNA-seq analysis display the magnitude of gene expression changes (log2 fold change) against their statistical significance. This allows for quick identification of significantly up- and down-regulated genes between two conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Volcano plots in RNA-Seq analysis display the magnitude of gene expression changes (log2 fold change) against their statistical significance. This allows for quick identification of significantly up- and down-regulated genes between two conditions.
```

    :::

    ```r
    # Create volcano plots for differential expression comparisons
    # Function to create a volcano plot
    create_volcano_plot <- function(res, title) {
      ggplot(res$table, aes(x = logFC, y = -log10(FDR))) +
        geom_point(aes(color = FDR < 0.05 &
                        abs(logFC) > 1), size = 0.5) +
        scale_color_manual(values = c("black", "red")) +
        labs(title = title, x = "Log2 Fold Change", y = "-Log10 FDR") +
        theme_minimal()
    }

    # Create volcano plots for each comparison
    for (name in names(results)) {
      p <- create_volcano_plot(results[[name]], name)
      # Display in RStudio
      print(p)
      # Save to file (change `.png` to `.pdf` to create PDF files)
      ggsave(
        paste0("volcano_plot_", name, ".png"),
        p,
        width = 8,
        height = 6,
        dpi = 300
      )
    }
    ```

1. Create a heatmap of the top 50 differentially expressed genes:

    :::info

>     Heatmaps in RNA-seq analysis provide a color-coded representation of gene expression levels across multiple samples or conditions, enabling the visualization of expression patterns and sample clustering based on similarity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Heatmaps in RNA-Seq analysis provide a color-coded representation of gene expression levels across multiple samples or conditions, enabling the visualization of expression patterns and sample clustering based on similarity.
```

      trace = "none",
      dendrogram = "column",
      margins = c(5, 10),
      labRow = FALSE,
      ColSideColors = rainbow(length(unique(y$samples$group)))[factor(y$samples$group)],
      main = "Top DE Genes Across Samples"
    )
    dev.off()

    # Print the number of top genes in the heatmap
    print(paste("Number of top DE genes in heatmap:", length(top_genes)))
    ```

![RStudio plots](./_images/rstudio.gif)

### Collaborate in the data studio

To share your results or allow colleagues to perform exploratory analysis, share a link to the data studio by selecting the options menu for the data studio you want to share, then select **Copy data studio URL**. With this link, other authenticated users with the **Connect** [role](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx) (or greater) can access the session directly.

## RNA-Seq data and requirements

RNA-Seq data typically consists of raw sequencing reads from high-throughput sequencing technologies. These reads are used to quantify gene expression levels and discover novel transcripts. A typical RNA-Seq dataset can range from a few GB to several hundred GB, depending on the number of samples and the sequencing depth.

> ### nf-core/rnaseq performance in Platform

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker, but approaching this from a scientist's point of view, I'm left wondering how many times this was run to generate these values. Simply, was this a single run? Or was the analysis run multiple times to generate these numbers?

Author: Added small clarification that the benchmark is a single run of the pipeline on each CE.

> The compute recommendations in this guide are based on internal benchmarking performed by Seqera. Benchmark runs of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) used profile `test_full`, consisting of an input dataset with 16 FASTQ files (8 paired-end samples) and a total size of approximately 123.5 GB.

Reviewer 3: This is also described above, does it need to be on the page twice? I commented this above as well.

This benchmark compares pipeline run metrics between an AWS Batch compute environment with Fusion file system and fast instance storage enabled (**Fusion** group) and an identical AWS Batch compute environment using S3 storage without Fusion (**AWS S3** group).

### Pipeline steps and computing resource requirements

The nf-core/rnaseq pipeline involves several key steps, each with distinct computational requirements. Resource needs in this table are based on the `test_full` runs detailed previously:

| **Pipeline step**                   | **Tools**                 | **Resource needs**           | **Description**                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **Quality Control (QC)**            | FastQC, MultiQC           | Low-moderate CPU (50-200 % single-core usage), low memory (1-7 GB peak)     | Initial quality checks of raw reads to assess sequencing quality and identify potential issues.   |
> | **Read Trimming**                   | Trim Galore!              | High CPU (up to 700 % single-core usage), low memory (6 GB peak) | Removal of adapter sequences and low-quality bases to prepare reads for alignment.               |
> | **Read Alignment**                  | HISAT2, STAR              | Moderate-high CPU (480-600 % single-core usage), high memory (36 GB peak)       | Alignment of trimmed reads to a reference genome, typically the most resource-intensive step.    |
> | **Pseudoalignment**              | Salmon, Kallisto              | Moderate-high CPU (420 % single-core usage), moderate memory (18 GB peak)        | A faster, more accurate method of gene expression quantification than alignment using read compatibility.    |
> | **Quantification**                  | featureCounts, Salmon     | Moderate-high CPU (500-600 % single-core usage), moderate memory (18 GB peak) | Counting the number of reads mapped to each gene or transcript to measure expression levels.     |
> | **Differential Expression Analysis**| DESeq2, edgeR             | High CPU (650 % single-core usage), low memory (up to 2 GB peak )     | Statistical analysis to identify genes with significant changes in expression between conditions. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Quality Control (QC)**            | FastQC, MultiQC           | Low-moderate CPU (50-200% single-core usage), low memory (1-7 GB peak)     | Initial quality checks of raw reads to assess sequencing quality and identify potential issues.   |
| **Read Trimming**                   | Trim Galore!              | High CPU (up to 700% single-core usage), low memory (6 GB peak) | Removal of adapter sequences and low-quality bases to prepare reads for alignment.               |
| **Read Alignment**                  | HISAT2, STAR              | Moderate-high CPU (480-600% single-core usage), high memory (36 GB peak)       | Alignment of trimmed reads to a reference genome, typically the most resource-intensive step.    |
| **Pseudoalignment**              | Salmon, Kallisto              | Moderate-high CPU (420% single-core usage), moderate memory (18 GB peak)        | A faster, more accurate method of gene expression quantification than alignment using read compatibility.    |
| **Quantification**                  | featureCounts, Salmon     | Moderate-high CPU (500-600% single-core usage), moderate memory (18 GB peak) | Counting the number of reads mapped to each gene or transcript to measure expression levels.     |
| **Differential Expression Analysis**| DESeq2, edgeR             | High CPU (650% single-core usage), low memory (up to 2 GB peak )     | Statistical analysis to identify genes with significant changes in expression between conditions. |
```
No gap for % ?

#### Overall run metrics

The Fusion file system used with NVMe instance storage contributed to a 34 % improvement in total pipeline runtime and a 49 % reduction in CPU hours. 

Total pipeline run cost: 

> - Fusion file system with fast instance storage: $ 34.90

Reviewer 3: Currency? USD?

> The Fusion file system used with NVMe instance storage contributed to a 34 % improvement in total pipeline runtime and a 49 % reduction in CPU hours. 
> 
> Total pipeline run cost: 
> - Fusion file system with fast instance storage: $ 34.90
> - Plain S3 storage without Fusion: $ 58.40

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Fusion file system used with NVMe instance storage contributed to a 34% improvement in total pipeline runtime and a 49% reduction in CPU hours. 

Total pipeline run cost: 
- Fusion file system with fast instance storage: $34.90
- Plain S3 storage without Fusion: $58.40
```

> ![Run metrics overview](./_images/cpu-table.png)

Reviewer 3: I find it strange that this graph sits under money values that aren't shown in the graph. Should they be plotted here too? Or can the graph me moved? Or the cost have a new section?

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker

Author: Moved cost above with a small header. Thanks.

#### Process run time

The Fusion file system demonstrates significant performance improvements for most processes in the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline, particularly for I/O-intensive tasks: 

> - The most time-consuming processes see improvements of 36-70%, saving hours of runtime in a full pipeline execution.
> - Most processes show significant performance improvements with Fusion, with time savings ranging from 35% to 99%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The most time-consuming processes see improvements of 36-70%, saving hours of runtime in a full pipeline execution.
- Most processes show significant performance improvements with Fusion, with time savings ranging from 35% to 99%.
```
I'm not sure what the rule is here, but you have two decimal places on some numbers but not these, if they are referencing table numbers that are listed with 2 dp, I would say "approximately...", otherwise, I'd be specific and list the numbers.

- The most substantial improvements are seen in I/O-intensive tasks like SAMTOOLS_FLAGSTAT (95.20% faster) and SAMTOOLS_IDXSTATS (99.14% faster).
- SALMON_INDEX shows a notable 70.15% improvement, reducing runtime from 102.18 minutes to 30.50 minutes.
- STAR_ALIGN_IGENOMES, one of the most time-consuming processes, is 53.82% faster with Fusion, saving nearly an hour of runtime.

> ![Run time per process](./_images/process-runtime.png) 

Reviewer 3: What are the error bars here? SD, SE, IQR?

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker.

- Adding pipelines to your workspace 
- Importing your pipeline input data
- Launching the pipeline and monitoring execution from your workspace
- Setting up a custom analysis environment with Data Studios
- Resource allocation guidance for RNA-Seq data

:::info[**Prerequisites**]
You will need the following to get started:

- [Admin](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx) permissions in an existing organization workspace. See [Set up your workspace](./workspace-setup.mdx) to create an organization and workspace from scratch.
- An existing AWS cloud account with access to the AWS Batch service.
- Existing access credentials with permissions to create and manage resources in your AWS account. See [IAM](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx#iam) for guidance to set up IAM permissions for Platform. 
:::

## Compute environment

Compute and storage requirements for RNA-Seq analysis are dependent on the number of samples and the sequencing depth of your input data. See [RNA-Seq data and requirements](#rna-seq-data-and-requirements) for details on RNA-Seq datasets and the CPU and memory requirements for important steps of RNA-Seq pipelines. 

> In this guide, we will create an AWS Batch compute environment with sufficient resources allocated to run the [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline with a large (123.5 GB) dataset. This compute environment will also be used to run a Data Studios RStudio environment for tertiary analysis of the resulting pipeline data. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will create an AWS Batch compute environment with sufficient resources allocated to run the [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline with a large (123.5 GB) dataset. This compute environment will also be used to run a Data Studios RStudio environment for tertiary analysis of the resulting pipeline data. 
```
Changing this to you as we isn't used often and it feels weird to suddenly switch. Ignore if you disagree.

:::

### Recommended compute environment resources

The following compute resources are recommended for production RNA-Seq pipelines, depending on the size of your input dataset:

| **Setting**                    | **Value**                             |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| **Instance Types**             | `m5,r5`             |
| **vCPUs**                      | 2 - 8                                 |
| **Memory (GiB)**               | 8 - 32                                |
| **Max CPUs**                   | >500                                  |
| **Min CPUs**                   | 0                                     |

#### Fusion file system 

The [Fusion](../supported_software/fusion/fusion.mdx) file system enables seamless read and write operations to cloud object stores, leading to
simpler pipeline logic and faster, more efficient execution. While Fusion is not required to run nf-core/rnaseq, it is recommended for optimal performance. See [Pipeline performance](#pipeline-performance) at the end of this guide.

> We recommend using Fusion with AWS NVMe instances (fast instance storage) as this delivers the fastest performance when compared to environments using only AWS EBS (Elastic Block Store). Batch Forge selects instances automatically based on your compute environment configuration, but you can optionally specify instance types. To enable fast instance storage (see Create compute environment below), you must select EC2 instances with NVMe SSD storage (`m5d` or `r5d` families). 

Author: Agreed.

| **Enable Fast Instance Storage**      | Use NVMe instance storage to speed up I/O and disk access. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Config Mode**                       | Batch Forge                                                |
| **Provisioning Model**                | Choose between Spot and On-demand instances.               |
| **Max CPUs**                          | Sensible values for production use range between 2000 and 5000.|
| **Enable Fargate for head job**       | Run the Nextflow head job using the Fargate container service to speed up pipeline launch. Requires Fusion v2.|
| **Allowed S3 buckets**                | Additional S3 buckets or paths to be granted read-write permission for this compute environment. Add data paths to be mounted in your data studio here, if different from your pipeline work directory.|
| **Resource labels**                   | `name=value` pairs to tag the AWS resources created by this compute environment.|

## Add pipeline to Platform 

:::info
The [nf-core/rnaseq](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) pipeline is a highly configurable and robust workflow designed to analyze RNA-Seq data. It performs quality control, alignment and quantification.

> ![nf-core/rnaseq subway map](./_images/nf-core-rnaseq_metro_map_grey_static.svg)

Author: Hmm, looked good to me! You must be on a big monitor :D thanks, mate.

- **Workflow run name**: An identifier for the run, pre-filled with a random name. This can be customized.
- **Labels**: Assign new or existing [labels](../labels/overview.mdx) to the run.
- **Compute environment**: Your AWS Batch compute environment. 
- **Work directory**: The cloud storage path where pipeline scratch data is stored. Platform will create a scratch sub-folder if only a cloud bucket location is specified.
  :::note
  The credentials associated with the compute environment must have access to the work directory.
  :::

### Run parameters 

![Run parameters](./_images/launch-form-3.gif)

There are three ways to enter **Run parameters** prior to launch:

- The **Input form view** displays form fields to enter text, select attributes from dropdowns, and browse input and output locations with [Data Explorer](../data/data-explorer.mdx).
- The **Config view** displays raw configuration text that you can edit directly. Select JSON or YAML format from the **View as** dropdown.

> - **Upload params file** allows you to upload a JSON or YAML file with run parameters.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if there is a Seqera way of writing dropdown

> - **Upload params file** allows you to upload a JSON or YAML file with run parameters.

Author: We have no set rule for this, and Google style guide recommends dropping the term altogether unless omitting it would be confusing. So, I'm stripping the term drop-down out everywhere on the page. Thanks.

![Read trimming options](./quickstart-demo/assets/trimmer-settings.png)

### Advanced settings 

- Use [resource labels](../resource-labels/overview.mdx) to tag the computing resources created during the workflow execution. While resource labels for the run are inherited from the compute environment and pipeline, admins can override them from the launch form. Applied resource label names must be unique. 
- [Pipeline secrets](../secrets/overview.mdx) are used to store keys and tokens used by workflow tasks to interact with external systems. Enter the names of any stored user or workspace secrets required for the workflow execution.
- See [Advanced options](../launch/advanced.mdx) for more details.

After you have filled the necessary launch details, select **Launch**. The **Runs** tab shows your new run in a **submitted** status at the top of the list. Select the run name to navigate to the [**View Workflow Run**](../monitoring/overview.mdx) page and view the configuration, parameters, status of individual tasks, and run report.

> <details>

Reviewer 3: Something weird happening here. It is shown in the right side navigation but won't take me here when I click on it. Is a good idea to have these heading hidden like this?

Reviewer 3: E.g., view reports does nothing when you click on it.

Author: You're right. I changed the config for the page so that only H2s are shown on the ToC on the right. So the headings inside that collapsed section are now excluded from the ToC.

  #### Task work directory in Data Explorer

 If a task fails, a good place to begin troubleshooting is the task's work directory. Click on the data explorer pane of the task window and check the files in this the task working directory.
  Nextflow hash-addresses each task of the pipeline and creates unique directories based on these hashes. Data Explorer allows you to view the log files and output files generated for each task in its working directory, directly within Platform. You can view, download, and retrieve the link for these intermediate files in cloud storage from the **Data Explorer** tab to simplify troubleshooting.

  ![Task data explorer](./quickstart-demo/assets/sp-cloud-task-data-explorer.gif)

</details>

## Tertiary analysis with Data Studios

**Data Studios** streamlines the process of creating interactive analysis environments for Platform users. With built-in templates for platforms like Jupyter Notebook, RStudio, and VSCode, creating a data studio is as simple as adding and sharing pipelines or datasets. The data studio URL can also be shared with any user with the [Connect role](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx) for real-time access and collaboration.

> For the purposes of this guide, we will create an RStudio environment in which to normalize the pipeline output data, perform differential expression analysis, and visualize the data with exploratory plots.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the purposes of this guide, you can create an RStudio environment in which to normalize the pipeline output data, perform differential expression analysis, and visualize the data with exploratory plots.  
```
We is only used three times in this tutorial. Ignore if you disagree.
